---
layout: post
title: "An Excel template of Personal Finance for college students (Part 2)"
date: 2023-06-08 21:01:00
description: this is what included images could look like
tags: formatting images
categories: sample-posts
thumbnail: assets/img/9.jpg
---

Before I proceed with this part of the series, I would like to remind you to read <a href="/blog/2023/finance1/" target="_blank">Part 1</a> if you haven’t already. In part 1, we discuss the importance of financial literacy for college students, review current budgeting tools, and introduce an Excel template for Personal Finance. I also highlight on building expense tracking habits, which is the most important step of managing Personal Finance.

In part 2, we will delve into tracking your financial progress by focusing on monitoring your balance sheet. We will also discuss setting financial targets to help you reach your desired financial state. Please open the Balance Sheet & Goals sheet of the template to easier follow the below guide.

<h3>Balance Sheet</h3>

If you’ve tracked your expenses consistently for at least one month, congratulations, you’ve taken the most difficult step towards financial literacy. With this awareness of your spending habits, you’re now ready to review your current financial state through a Balance Sheet.

The Balance Sheet provides a comprehensive view of your assets, liabilities at present and in the future. You can specify the timespan for the Balance Sheet by adjusting the “Up to MM-YY” parameter. For instance, “Up to 06-23” means you’ll track all assets and liabilities up until June 2023. It’s a good practice to update the timespan at least twice a year, on June and December, to mark the first and second halves of the year.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/9.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Example Balance Sheet
</div>

The Balance Sheet is divided into two sections: “At present” and “Future.” The “Future” section is further divided into “Debt” and “Expected Income/Loans.” To fill it out, simply list your current and future monetary assets and liabilities in the corresponding sections.

<ul>
  <li>At present: Make sure to include all of your accounts (main account, saving account, etc) and record the current balances in the corresponding cells (B11:B16).</li>
  <li>Future: Track all your expected assets and liabilities, which includes expected income/loans and debts along with their respective payment months in the corresponding cells (B19:B28).</li>
</ul>

After logging in the balance of all types of asset and liabilities, orange cells would display your current and the expected balance (prior to deducting monthly expenses) at the end of the timespan.

Regular review of the balance sheet allows you to monitor your financial progress and make necessary adjustments to your spending habits. I review my balance sheet for every two months, or when I have a big change in my cash flow (a new job, a need to use emergency account). It will also help you in the final step: setting short-term financial targets.

<h3>Setting Financial Targets</h3>

Since you calculated your Expected Balance, it’s time to set your Target Balance at the end of each timespan. To achieve the target, you either try to increase your income or decrease your monthly expenses. Given there are no changes in your income, the maximum amount of monthly expenses is calculated as followings:

Monthly spending = (Expected Balance – Target Balance) / No. of months by the end of the timespan

Let say that on Feb 1st, you target that you have at least 50M in your total balance by June, which means that you have 5 months to achieve the target. You also calculated that your Expected Balance by June is 80M. Therefore, unless there are increases to your income, the maximum spending to achieve the target is:

(80 – 50)/5 = 6 (millions per month)

Keep in mind that the maximum spending is subjected to changes, in case there is an unexpected change in your cash flow, so regular review of the balance sheet is necessary. In addition, I usually set the preferred spending that I try to achieve, which is equal to 80% of the maximum spending. This would help me ensure I still achieve the target in case my income is reduced in the next few months.

Make sure that you set realistic targets, means that your maximum/preferred spending should not be too low compared to your past monthly spendings. Minimize your wasted and limit nice-to-have spendings to reach the goals, and write down your Financial Pledge can also help in committing to your targets.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/9.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Financial targets & financial pledge
</div>

Finally, remember to account for future major expenses, like buying a laptop or going on a trip, in a separate table outside of regular monthly spending. Consider these expenses as rewards for your financial progress, but adjust your financial targets to ensure it do not hinder your targets.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/9.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Expected major spendings
</div>

The Excel template is designed to be flexible, allowing you to adapt your financial goals as your situation evolves. Through consistent and thoughtful planning, you can establish a stable financial base for your future, even while navigating college life.

<a href="downloadable-excel-file-link" download>Download Excel Template</a>