---
layout: post
title: "Assessing data products - an intern's perspective"
date: 2023-07-11 21:01:00
description: this is what included images could look like
tags: formatting images
categories: sample-posts
thumbnail: assets/img/9.jpg
---

As a Data Analyst in a few retail companies in Vietnam, I notice a recurring question in the in-house data products we delivered. As data professionals, we constantly try to measure the value that we bring to our organizations. Whether we provide ad-hoc analysis, automate processes, or feed data for machine learning, the question remains: did we produce a better return than investment? This post dives deeper into this topic by exploring areas that are often neglected in the assessment of data products from an intern’s perspective.


<h3>Quality vs. Time</h3>

At my most recent role, I experienced firsthand the pressure of delivering data quickly for business value. During a launch of a new product, the company needed insights into past product trends from competitors to overcome the stagnation of the current product, and this request is urgent for immediate recommended actions to sales team. The data team had to deliver a PowerPoint presentation as quickly as possible with the tradeoff of compromising data quality. The accuracy and completeness of the data were not verified, and potential outliers or anomalies were not identified. The primary focus was on delivering immediate business value, but it disregarded the significance of maintaining data quality, which could have led to incomplete or inaccurate insights.

When there’s not enough time, it’s tempting to to provide incomplete data rather than nothing at all. However, deciding between timely incomplete data and delayed complete data can be complicated and dependent on the situation. It’s crucial to strike a balance between providing quick results and maintaining data quality to deliver accurate insights.

# teamwork image

<h3>Regular reviews</h3>

Without regular assessments, even high-quality data products can quickly become outdated and irrelevant. For example, a retail company may have a data artefact that provides daily sales reports for each store location. Without regular assessments, this data product may not keep up with changes in the business logic, such as the addition of features in new products, changes in customer behavior, or shifts in the competitive landscape. Therefore, a continuous improvement process is vital, which includes setting up a feedback loop with users, monitoring data quality, and staying current with new technologies and practices. They may discover that some store managers need more granular data to optimize their inventory, or that the data product can be simplified by removing unnecessary fields. By addressing these areas, the company can maximize the value of their data and gain a competitive advantage.

<h3>What matter for us, the Interns and Freshers?</h3>

As a data intern or fresher, it’s not enough to learn how to build build data products. It’s equally important to understand the value of assessing these products. By being mindful of monitoring data quality, collecting informal user feedback, and staying up-to-date with new technologies and practices, they can better understand the impact of each data product on the business. Even if you are not directly involved in the decision-making process, your contributions can make a difference by suggesting improvements and areas for further exploration. By embracing a continuous improvement process and always striving to deliver the best possible value through their work, data interns and freshers can help their organizations succeed in the ever-evolving landscape of data-driven decision making.